Good morning.
Welcome to the Resolution
Independence on Mac OS X session.
I like to call this feature
Resolution Independence,
but you'll probably catch me
calling it High DPI occasionally.
So if you hear High DPI,
I'm talking Resolution Independence.
It just often gets confused
in my head as I say it.
So the purpose of this session is
to tell you everything you need
to do to make your application
resolution independent on Mac OS X.
But before I go into those details,
I want to tell you why this is important.
So lots of the technology industries
that we're used to constantly make
products that are bigger and better.
Your TVs are moving towards HDTV,
DVDs moving towards Blu-ray,
mass storage went from megabytes to
gigabytes and terabytes and beyond.
And displays really aren't any different.
Every couple of years,
Apple ships another machine
with a higher resolution
display than it has in the past.
And we expect this trend to continue.
And therefore,
we are telling you this year that
we need your applications to be
resolution independent by 2008.
So let's talk a little bit about
what resolution independence means.
So this is a screenshot
from a 23-inch display.
I don't remember the actual pixel
resolution on each dimension.
But when you use this
23-inch display today,
it's running at 100 dots per inch.
Looks pretty darn good, very usable.
If Apple decided to
ship a 23-inch display,
however, that used 200 dots per inch,
you'd get something like this.
And that may look like a lot of
awesome screen real estate to you,
but in reality, it's not very usable.
Right?
The text is way too small.
The graphics are way too small.
It's just impossible to get
done what you need to get done.
So what we really want to do is
make this text on the display
and the images on the display,
instead of being smaller,
we want to use those added
pixels to make them crisper.
So let's zoom in on this top left corner.
of the display and take a
look at how it looks today.
So this is a screenshot of text edit.
This was an actual screenshot of a
very small portion of the display.
And as you can see, it's kind of grainy,
right?
At a normal viewing distance,
it looks pretty good.
But when you scrutinize the text,
you can see that it's anti-aliased.
You can tell we're using
bitmap artwork for the various
system controls and so forth.
And if we actually applied
more pixels to this image,
we can make a much crisper and
sharper looking user interface,
something like this.
Right?
So you can see we've got crisper text,
we've got crisper system controls,
and it looks just generally really,
really good.
So again, this is now.
This is how it is today,
and this is how it
could be in the future.
So let me show you resolution
independence in action.
Can we switch over to the
Intel demo machine real quick?
Okay, so this is the leopard seed
with nothing special on it.
Now, we don't actually have a
high resolution display here.
In order to demo resolution independence,
you have to deal with a little bit of,
I don't want to call
it smoke and mirrors,
but it's essentially smoke and mirrors.
I'm not going to give you
a high resolution display,
but I'm going to make the
system act as though you've
got a high resolution display.
In order to make crisper text
and graphics in a given window,
we need to put more
pixels in those windows.
So we've got this concept
of a scale factor.
The scale factor is the ratio of the
pixels across a certain dimension
of a window on a high-res display
relative to a normal resolution display.
So if your display has twice as many
pixels horizontally and vertically,
we'd call that a 2.0 scale factor.
So Leopards allows you to set a
scale factor via Quartz Debug.
For those of you that have
used Quartz Debug before,
this is generally a graphics
test tool that allows you
to detect redundant drawing,
flushing behaviors that
are strange and so forth.
But they added something specific
for resolution independence for us.
In the Tools menu,
there's this Show User Interface
Resolution item.
You choose that,
and you get another panel.
This allows you to set the scale
factor for your Leopard boot.
So right now we're at 1.
1 is the default scale.
That's what Mac OS has
traditionally been.
We can increase the scale factor,
let's say, to something like 3.0,
and immediately you see a change.
It might have been kind of
hard to see because it was down
at the bottom of the screen,
so let's do it again.
So look at the bottom of the screen.
We're at 1.
The dock is normal sized.
If we choose scale factor 3.0,
you see the dock immediately gets bigger.
The dock is one of the few places
on the system that actually react
live to a scale factor change.
The dock knows it's trying to
make each of its dock items three
times as big in height and width.
It just so happens that there's
not enough space to actually
make them three times as big,
so the dock shrinks it down a little bit.
So once we've set the
user interface resolution,
any application we launch after that
fact adopts that higher scale factor.
So if I fire up TextEdit,
you can see TextEdit gets really big,
right?
The window takes three times as
many pixels in the backing buffer,
both horizontally and vertically,
that it would have normally.
And it's still a fully
functional TextEdit.
You can move through the menus,
choose commands.
I can copy and paste text and
delete stuff and interact with
the various controls and so forth.
Although strangely,
it's not actually working.
Huh, okay, well,
I'll chalk that up to a leopard bug.
Um...
Anyway, otherwise it is a live text edit.
So clearly we're seeing
some benefit here.
We've got much crisper,
sharper system controls.
We've got great looking text.
Now there are a few bugs.
If you look over on the right
hand side of the monitor,
you can see that that scroll bar-- well,
it may be kind of hard to tell
on this display on the projection
screen-- but that scroll bar is
still using old low res artwork.
It's because we're not finished
making Leopard resolution independent.
So there are a few rough
edges here and there.
Another example that is hard to see
are these markers in text edit's ruler.
A few of them are still
a little bit jaggy.
Again, that's because we don't
have the high res art.
OK, so that's text edit.
Let me launch another app.
OK, so we're looking at Safari.
And Safari is a little mixed here.
So you can see that Safari has these
really nice looking window widgets.
And it's got great looking menu text.
And it has great looking window
title bar text and so forth.
But when you actually start
looking at the web content,
you can see that it's a little bit jaggy.
And that's because it's web content.
The system can scale up
all the art in the system,
but we can't scale up-- or sorry,
we can't actually generate higher
resolution art for content that's
out there on the web someplace.
So Safari is taking that
art and literally scaling
it up and interpolating it.
So it's going to look a
little jaggy and grainy.
Now, that's just the--
images on the page.
The text on the page
still looks fantastic,
right?
Because it's still rendered with Quartz,
and it respects the scale
factor and looks great.
OK, so let's see.
Let's launch another app here.
Get rid of TextEdit.
So these are both Cocoa apps.
Cocoa does a ton of the
resolution independence work
on your app's behalf for free.
But Cocoa was clearly not the
only app flavor that needs
to be resolution independent.
Carbon, Java apps,
and various other sorts
of apps also need to be,
and they can be as well.
So Finder is a Carbon app.
Let me quit Finder now and relaunch it.
And you can see that Finder
also respects the scale factor.
And again,
Finder's a little bit of a mixed bag,
much like Safari.
It's got great looking text,
fantastic looking icons.
But there's a few system controls
in Carbon that haven't revved yet
to use the high resolution artwork.
And you can see that tool tip that
came up is also still drawing low res.
But we have a Carbon app here that's
also become resolution independent.
OK, so one note about Finder.
Finder is what we call
a modern Carbon app.
They have gotten off of Quick Draw.
They're using Quartz to
do all their drawing.
And they use HIV Compositing Mode.
That's the only way Finder could get the
crisp text and graphics that they have.
Applications that have not adopted
HIV Compositing Mode and that still use
Quick Draw can't be truly resolution
independent and truly look great.
But we do have a little bit of
a fallback solution for them.
OK, let me make finder
usable here real quick.
Bring it back at a 1.0 scale factor.
Let's crank the scale factor up to 3.
And we'll launch Appearance Sample.
So Appearance Sample is one of
our Carbon sample applications
that shows off a lot of the
Carbon controls and so forth.
It's an unmodified Carbon app that
continues to use Quick Draw and that
does not use HIV compositing mode.
It's still big.
We still make it fit in.
But we make it fit in with resolution
independence by magnifying a normal
old-sized window backing buffer up.
So your text is a little
blurry and your controls and
so forth are a little blurry.
And again, this is because we've got a
normal resolution window backing
buffer that's being scaled up and
interpolated by the Windows Server.
So at least this allows unmodified
Carbon applications to fit in.
But clearly,
Carbon applications want to rev to
be truly resolution independent.
There are some Carbon apps
whose clients expect to actually
see and manipulate the pixels.
Every popular graphics app is this way.
A lot of the drawing apps are this way.
A magnifier modified drawing
app isn't really usable.
I mean, you can use it.
It's functional.
But if an HI designer or an
artist can't see pixel perfection,
it's not going to work.
So those Carbon apps need to
either-- they can rewrite for Cocoa,
certainly, and then they'll get
resolution independence easily.
But the other option is to get
rid of their Quick Draw drawing
and move to HIV compositing mode.
And then it's just as easy to
adopt resolution independence
as it is with Cocoa.
OK, so somebody asked about the menus.
The menus still look fantastic.
The menus,
because they're drawn by the system-- oh,
I see, the clipping.
That's a bug in the toolbox.
We'll fix that before we ship.
Actually,
So I'm not sure whether you're
talking about the truncation
or the menu at the top right.
So the truncation is just a
factor of the fact that we're
running at a 3.0 scale factor,
and Appearance Samples menus
take up a lot of space.
So a 3.0 scale factor probably isn't
something a user would run at on a
display with this physical resolution.
Typically, when I test and so forth,
I will run at a 1.5 or
a 1.25 scale factor.
I can tell the interface is scaled up,
but it's still usable.
I don't get my menus
clipped and so forth.
OK, so that's it for the demo.
Let's kick back over to slides.
So I mentioned two kinds of windows.
There were the nice
looking Cocoa windows,
the nice looking Carbon windows,
and there were those not so
nice looking Carbon windows.
So let's go through those and one other,
what we call a scale mode.
Framework scaled mode is how we got
those nice looking Cocoa windows
and nice looking Carbon windows.
This is where your applications need
to be for resolution independence.
It allows you to get the
great looking user interface.
We take your Windows request
for its size,
multiply that times the scale factor,
and we build its backing buffer
out of that many pixels in the
horizontal and vertical dimensions.
So we've got more pixels that
we're using to render the content,
and that's how we make it look great.
So that's framework scaled mode.
That's where you want to be.
What Appearance Sample used was
what we call magnified mode.
And like I said,
this was the compatibility mode to
make unmodified Carbon apps fit in.
The way this works is we take
a normal window backing buffer
and have the Windows server
scale that up interpolating.
So it doesn't look great,
but it's certainly usable.
We have a third mode which I didn't
show off because it's not implemented,
and that's what we call small mode.
This is our contingency plan.
We found that a number of
applications simply don't work
in resolution independence mode,
either in framework scaled
mode or magnified mode.
They do a number of things that
aren't legal or just aren't compatible
with resolution independence,
and we can't fix that in the system.
Apps are making potentially bad
assumptions about the coordinate systems
that APIs are using and so forth.
We can't break those assumptions.
So what we may have to do instead
is put this small mode in place.
So in our testing as we're
implementing resolution independence,
if we find an application
that just can't work,
we'll probably put an app-specific
workaround in place for that app
so it comes up in this small mode.
Small mode uses the same window backing
buffer pixel dimensions as it always has,
but leaves the image small as well.
Hence the name small mode.
So it allows the apps to
actually be functional,
but it looks pretty dull.
It's pretty jarring, right?
If you were on a display that used
a 2.0 scale factor and you launched
an app that's in small mode,
the windows are really tiny
and potentially unusable,
depending on how high your
scale factor needs to be.
So not only will we have
app-specific workarounds in place
for certain ill-behaved apps,
but we will probably also need
to make small mode a user option,
much the same way the launch in Rosetta
checkbox is a user option in Finder,
right?
Certainly Apple can't test every
application that's out there.
A user may be running an app
and find some problem running
in resolution independence mode
that they just can't work around.
And so they need a way to request to
run this application in small mode
so they can get their work done.
But we don't have that
switch in place yet,
but we'll have something for Leopard GM.
[Transcript missing]
OK, so let's talk about how Leopard
supports resolution independence.
So as I showed off--
A lot of the system controls
support high res content in Leopard.
Not all of them.
There's a few rough edges,
but we're working hard to replace
the artwork for all of our system
controls with artwork that can
draw at virtually any resolution.
It'll look fantastic at any resolution.
We're also adding a few system
controls and a few variants of
system controls to give applications
standard versions of things that they
were currently coding up themselves.
And we'll make sure to put
high resolution artwork to back
those pieces of art so that
your app can look fantastic.
We've also added another size
of icon data to icon services.
So it now supports up
to 512 by 512 icons.
I think the previous
limit was 256 by 256.
But most importantly,
we're revving system applications
to be high DPI savvy.
We've chosen a few key applications
that stress various parts of the
system so that we can make sure
our resolution independent strategy
works and is actually adoptable.
So as I showed,
Finder and TextEdit and Safari work,
but we also have a few other
apps that I listed up here,
and there will be more to come
by the time LepreGM ships.
We're also adding some new
standard art that's accessible
via an existing mechanism,
but-- well, it's an existing API,
but it's a new mechanism.
NSImage has supported the notion of named
images for as long as I can remember.
And generally what this is used
for is to fetch an image out
of your application's bundle.
So you put foo.jpg in your bundle and
you can instantiate an NS image with
name foo.jpg and then you'll have an
NS image that can render that file.
So we're extending that
to support system artwork.
NS image now supports a number of
standard pieces of artwork and this
will grow over time until Leopard ships.
So the Cocoa framework makes it really
easy to get to resolution independence.
Cocoa Windows are
automatically framework scaled.
You can take an unmodified Cocoa app,
launch it, the window will get bigger.
And it mostly works.
All your system text drawing,
system controls are
going to look fantastic.
Your custom drawing,
it's going to be a mixed bag.
Your custom text drawing will
probably look good so long as
you're using any modern API,
Quartz API, to render that text.
Your graphics, however, well,
we're going to scale those
up the same way Safari scaled
up the art in the web case,
right?
We only have the low resolution
artwork that's in your
application bundles to work with.
So we scale it up so
that it looks bigger,
but it's interpolated.
So you have some work to do there
to generate higher resolution
art if you're a Cocoa app.
But the important thing to note
is Cocoa apps basically just work
in resolution independence mode.
There are a few bugs and gotchas,
but we'll talk about those in a bit.
One important caveat is that
NS Quickdraw View doesn't work in Cocoa.
But the important caveat is that
NS Quickdraw View doesn't work
in resolution independence mode,
mainly because Quickdraw doesn't
work for resolution independence.
So if you're relying
on NS Quickdraw View,
you have to rethink that strategy
and come up with a different
implementation mechanism for
whatever it is you're doing.
. Carbon applications,
they have a little bit more work to do.
By default, as I showed,
they come up in magnified mode,
which allows them to fit in,
but they don't look perfect.
So in order for a Carbon application
to get to framework scaling mode,
they have to get off of Quick Draw and
get on to HIV compositing mode.
Once you do that,
you can go into interface builder and
click the framework scaling check box.
Actually, I think it's in a pop-up.
And that Carbon window
will be framework scaled.
And once you get to that point,
the story is essentially
the same as Cocoa.
Everything's going to look great except
for your custom content and artwork.
You'll need to rev your custom
art to make it look fantastic.
For those of you who tried out the
resolution independent support on Tiger,
we used to offer a mode called
application scaled mode,
which was a way that
Quick Draw based apps could be
resolution independent savvy.
We did some investigation here and we
found out that not only was that very
challenging for Apple to make work,
but it turns out that it forces
an application to do more work
to react to that than it did to
just get rid of Quick Draw drawing
and adopt HIV compositing mode.
So we're scrapping application
scaled mode altogether.
It does not work on Leopard.
Java also supports framework scaled mode.
So in general,
a Java app looks fantastic.
Again,
it comes down to the custom artwork.
Custom artwork gets scaled up as usual.
It's important to note that all
Java APIs operate in terms of points.
Every existing Java API that passes a
point or a rectangle or other sort of
coordinate interprets that coordinate
in the point space and will scale that
up if it needs to deal with pixels.
So our Apple's Java team is working
with Sun to put new APIs in place
in an upcoming version of Java such
that it's got direct resolution
independent support to allow your
Java applications to tweak their
UI a little bit to take advantage of
resolution independence in various ways.
So a fourth flavor of application
is a dashboard widget.
Dashboard widgets are
kind of web content,
JavaScript.
It's a little bit of a hybrid.
And dashboard widgets are kind of tricky.
So ostensibly,
they support framework scaling.
But we don't have a full
story in place for artwork.
So if you increase your scale factor,
log out, log in,
and bring up dashboard widgets,
they will be bigger for the most part.
But the artwork will be
scaled up and interpolated,
and they don't look great.
And unfortunately,
there's not a really good way
for a dashboard widget to put in
higher resolution artwork yet.
We're working really closely
with the dashboard team,
the Safari team,
and the WebKit team to establish
web standards and standards for
dashboard widgets so that they can
put high-res artwork out there.
Because we want to make sure
dashboard widgets looks absolutely
fantastic in high resolution.
OK.
So there are a number of steps you need
to take to adopt resolution independence.
The first thing you need to do,
look in your applications
bundle and find all your art.
Find all your PNG files, JPEGs, TIFFs,
whatever you're using to render
the art in your application.
Find it.
Make a list of it.
Keep it handy.
You're going to go through
each piece one by one.
Ask yourself some questions.
If you're using that piece of art
to replicate a standard control,
get off that art.
Adopt the standard control.
The standard controls will be
rev to support high res art,
so you might as well leverage that.
Maybe your piece of standalone art
is something that we now provide via
NSImages named image mechanism or via
icon services or something like that,
or maybe even HITheme.
If so, try to get off of your custom art
and adopt that other API instead.
Again, we're going to rev those APIs such
that they've got the high res art,
and you want to leverage
the system wherever you can.
A third category of art
is kind of interesting.
As we went through our own applications,
we found a lot of apps have
bitmap art for things like
rectangle fills or a frame,
just a rectangular
frame around something,
or a simple gradient.
And all of these things can be
represented via procedural code.
So in some of these cases,
we've decided to just
tell those applications,
look,
start rendering this via procedural code.
The procedural code uses quarts,
therefore it's inherently
scalable and it looks fantastic
in resolution independence mode.
So you should take a look and
see if you can do that as well.
So once you've made all the code changes,
everything left in your pile of art
is art that needs to be scaled up,
is art that you need to generate
higher resolution content for.
Oh, sorry.
Forgot to do this.
The other benefit of going
through your art is that you get
to toss all of that old art aside
and make your bundle smaller,
which is important,
because pretty soon I'm going to ask you
to make your bundle a little bit bigger.
So everything that's left in this
pile is artwork you need to revise
for resolution independence.
So what we're asking for is
your application art to support
scale factors up to 4.0.
or for icons, use the 512 by 512 version,
which isn't quite 4.0, it's 2.0,
but it still leaves
you a lot of headroom.
So the reason we want 4.0 or
4X is because it gives you a
lot of room for the future.
If you generate 4X artwork now,
you're going to save yourselves
a lot of time when the displays
actually catch up to that resolution.
So you need to ship your
application with versions of the
art that work at 1.0 and 4.0.
If this ends up being a problem
for apps with a lot of art that
are downloadable or so forth,
what you can do for the short term is
just ship your app with the 1X version
of the art and some lower resolution
that doesn't take up as much space.
So when you're making
your high resolution art,
the first piece of advice
I have-- and this is just advice,
this is not any kind of requirement--
is to avoid the use of bitmaps.
If I'm telling you to use a 1x version
of a bitmap and a 4x version of your
bitmap and put that in your bundle,
you've just spent 17 or up to 17
times as much space for that one
piece of art in your application.
If you multiply that times 100
or 200 pieces of art that we see
in the big apps-- and in fact,
the big apps often have thousands--
that's a huge increase in disk footprint.
So if you can get off of bitmaps,
you're going to remove this huge disk
footprint increase from your application.
The other problem with bitmaps is you
need multiple versions to represent
both the low res look of your app
and the high res look of your app.
Both of those versions
need to be maintained.
In the future,
you may need to add an even higher one.
And this is a time expense
that the HI designers would
love to avoid if they can.
If they can give you a single
piece of art today that will
work at any scale factor,
they'd love to do it.
So if you can,
use vector formats to represent your art.
PDF is a great example.
We're using PDF for a lot
of the system art below.
I've got a little screenshot of six
of the different pieces of system art
that we're now using PDFs to render.
Obviously, they're much smaller.
They scale up to any
arbitrary resolution.
And it works really
great for monocolor art,
or art that has slight color
transformations to it and so forth.
Hopefully this goes without saying,
but we've run into a few people
that didn't quite get this.
A lot of vector formats
allow you to embed bitmaps.
Don't do that.
That completely defeats
the purpose of the vector.
The whole point of the vector
is that it's not a bitmap.
So if you store a bitmap in there,
it's essentially a bitmap,
and you've lost the whole advantage.
So don't do that.
Now, we know from experience that we
can't represent everything as
vectors and have it look as great
as we want it to on the system.
We can do a lot of stuff,
just not everything.
So there are a few pieces of art that
we know we need to ship as bitmaps.
I'm sure you're going to find yourself
in the same sort of situation.
And if you do need to create bitmaps,
here's what you need to do.
Create your 1x version of your bitmap,
which you already have.
Have your designers create
your 4x version of your bitmap.
Make sure you turn on compression so that
your 4X version is not monstrously huge.
And then merge them into a single file.
Multi-image TIFF is what we're using
internally in a lot of our applications.
We have the user bin TIFF util tool,
which I'll show in a little bit,
that allows you to take two
TIF files that have a single
resolution image in them and
merge them together into one file,
two images, two different resolutions.
But your application code,
most importantly,
gets to interact with this one
file as if it's just one image.
You don't even need to worry
about the fact that there's two
different representations in there.
It just works.
Another option that's very popular,
obviously, is PNG.
If you need to use PNG,
it does not support multiple
representations in a given file.
So your application will need to come
up with some kind of naming scheme.
You might want to have your existing
foo.png and a new foo for PNG,
perhaps.
And you need to rev your application
code to load the right one,
depending on what scale
factor you're using.
So I already mentioned
TIFF Util as one of the artwork
tools we have on the system.
Preview App has also revved so
that it can show the multiple
representations in a multi-rep TIFF file.
And we've also revved the icon composer
tool so that it supports the 512 by 512
ICNS data for your file system icons.
On TIFF Util as well,
there's a flag you can pass to it
that asks it to validate your art
to make sure it's going to work
properly in resolution independence.
And that's called the CAT High DPI check.
There is NS Images code
that iterates the multiple
representations in an image file,
relies on certain pieces of
metadata being set properly.
And CAT High DPI check makes sure
that metadata is set properly.
And it'll log to the console if it's not.
so you can make revs.
So once you have all this new art,
it's time to adopt it
in your application.
Your file system icons,
your application icon
and your document icons,
they're trivial.
Just drop them in your bundle.
For the most part,
adopting your other revised
artwork is pretty easy.
If you already were an NSImage
client or an ImageIO client,
you just drop the new file in,
replace the old file,
and it just works with
your existing code.
Some of you may need to rev to
adopt NSImage or ImageIO in order
to get this high-res artwork.
One thing I don't have mentioned
here that we're going to mention
in the toolbox session next is that
we've revved the Leopard Toolbox to
allow you to associate artwork by
path with various system controls.
So you can have a bevel
button that displays an image,
and you can just tell that bevel button,
"Go find the image at this path."
So that's a great way to make it work
with a multi-representation TIFF file,
for example.
You can just give it
the path of a TIFF file,
and the Carbon bevel button will
find the right image to use in there.
For those of you that want really
fine-grained control over your artwork,
Image.io is a great way to do it.
It doesn't give you
as much out-of-the-box
functionality as NSImage does.
If you want to use Image.io,
you can do all kinds of cool things,
having to deal with caching and so forth,
but you need to manually iterate
the images in the given file,
find the right one for the scale factor,
generate a CG image ref from that,
and draw that.
So it gives you finer-grained control,
but you have to go through
a little bit more work.
to make that work.
So I have this as step four,
but this is really an iterative process,
the whole testing part.
In theory, we test as we're developing.
So the whole point of the testing is
try a bunch of different scale factors.
1.0 is going to get tried implicitly
by thousands and millions of users.
But we have other key scale
factors we want you to try.
Quartz Debug has five
scale factors for you.
There's a 1.0, a 1.25, a 1.5, 2, and 3.
And we'd like you to test at all those.
In particular,
the 1.25 and 1.5 scale factors
are interesting because they
expose a whole new set of bugs
in applications and in the system
than the integral scale factors do.
And I'll talk about some of those later.
Now, even though Tiger had support
for resolution independence,
the support is not nearly
as rich as it is in Leopard,
and we've also fixed a bunch of
bugs in the Tiger implementation.
So don't test on Tiger.
It's kind of pointless.
Please test on Leopard.
And when you find bugs,
either fix them if they're your app bugs.
But if they're the system bugs,
let us know.
We know there's thousands of applications
out there and more every day.
We can't test them all.
So if you run across some system bug,
write it up in Radar,
and we'll try to take care
of it as soon as we can.
We really want the resolution
independence experience
in Leopard to be awesome.
So to fix a lot of these bugs,
sometimes you need to find
out what the scale factor is.
We have a couple
different ways to do that.
The preferred way is finding
out what the scale factor is
associated with the window.
The reason for this is you can
have an application whose windows,
it can have multiple windows,
and each of those windows can be
operating in a different scale mode.
The hairiest example is probably a
Carbon app that uses some Cocoa windows,
say for the color picker
or the font panel,
because those are Cocoa windows
that come up in a Carbon app.
And that Carbon app has
Rev to support resolution
independence in its main window.
So that's framework scaled.
But there's some other windows in that
application that haven't been revved yet.
And so those will come
up in magnified mode.
And the Cocoa window will also be
framework scaled because it's Cocoa.
And so you'll have these three flavors
of windows in your application,
and each of them could potentially
have a different scale factor.
In reality, they will only be up to two.
The magnified mode windows will be
operating at a 1.0 scale factor because
that's what the size of the backing
buffer is relative to the old size.
And the Carbon framework scaled and
Cocoa framework scaled will be running
at some higher than 1.0 scale factor.
So that's why we prefer for
you to ask for the scale factor
on a window-by-window basis.
If for some reason you need to find
out the global screen scale factor,
we've got accessors for that as well.
OK, so as you're testing,
you're going to run into a bunch of
stuff that we've already run into,
and so we have some advice
for how to deal with.
Clearly,
there are bugs in the leopard seed.
I already showed off that the scroll
bar doesn't have high-res artwork yet,
and the segmented views
don't have high-res art.
Another thing you'll probably run
into that happens more in Carbon apps
than in Cocoa apps is window
jitteriness or menu jitteriness.
There are some of our APIs that
have not yet been revved to
support floating point coordinates.
And floating point coordinates
are pretty critical to making
resolution independence work.
So you get various rounding
errors that compound,
and sometimes windows grow
a little bit more than they
should during a grow operation,
or sometimes when windows animate
in and out of showing a toolbar,
they'll jitter size-wise and so forth.
And you can see similar kinds
of things in the menu bar.
So these are all things we plan to
fix by the time we ship the seed,
but just be aware that you may
run into these as you're testing.
There's another bug in
Carbon Windows where we did not correctly
scale up the drag region for Windows,
for framework scaled Windows.
I don't remember whether it happens
in magnified mode Windows as well.
So if you have a Carbon app and you
flipped on framework scaling for that
window and it's not dragging right,
just drag from the top left corner
someplace and it should work.
Another sort of annoying thing
that we haven't quite worked
out are a few of our metrics.
We have some text positioning
problems in high res.
The push buttons and check boxes in
particular are the troubling ones.
I think the text is
positioned a pixel too low.
That's something we'll fix.
Clearly that means as you're
laying out your applications,
the text will look a little off
between various types of controls,
but just ignore that.
We'll get that fixed when we can.
So the first sort of application
bug that you'll run into is
a coordinate system mismatch.
So before when I was talking about points
and pixels and applications generally
not needing to know about pixels,
just needing about points, well,
there are a few APIs that
already talked in point space,
and your applications
need to be aware of that.
Unfortunately,
on all previous operating systems,
points mapped to pixels
at a one-to-one ratio.
So you could get away with
passing points to these APIs,
and it worked.
Well,
when you're running in high res mode,
it doesn't work in high res mode.
It doesn't work anymore.
So what you will see for some apps
or some windows in some apps is that
the windows come up too small or clip
portions of the text and so forth.
So in these cases,
you need to find out whether the API in
particular you're using to size that
window is expecting points or pixels
and pass the appropriate coordinates.
And we have APIs that you can use to
convert between the point space and the
pixel space for both Cocoa and Carbon.
Now we know your applications
can't deploy on Leopard and later,
particularly since we
haven't shipped Leopard.
So as you're adopting some of the
new system controls and artwork,
you're going to need probably to
do runtime checks for your adoption
for some of the brand new things.
But I think what you'll find is a lot
of the new system controls have actually
been around for three or four releases.
So you can probably get on board
those right away and deploy
them with your existing apps,
because they're supported even pre-Tiger.
Let's see.
Oh, right.
So NSImage has had multi-representation
TIFF file support for quite a long time.
So you can rely on that.
You can actually deploy
multi-representation
TIFF files in your apps today.
And it will work with NSImage so long
as you make sure that all the sizes
of the individual reps are the same.
But the pixel dimensions
are what's different.
And that's what the Cat High DPI check
that you pass into Tiff Util validates.
So if that's not true for your
two Tiff files that you're
trying to merge into one,
Tiff Util will log to the console saying,
hey,
you need to adjust this particular file
because it's got the wrong resolution,
or so forth.
OK, so another thing we have that
I think they mentioned at the
State of the Union yesterday
is the notion of pixel cracks.
This is another fairly common problem.
Pixel cracks occur when you have a
bunch of smaller bitmaps that you
use to assemble some larger control.
You want to make sure those smaller
bitmaps align exactly together so
you don't see gaps in the image.
And generally, that works fantastic
at a 1.0 scale factor.
But at non-integral scale
factors-- and it's kind of
hard to see on that screenshot,
so I've got a bigger one-- at
non-integral scale factors,
those integral pixel boundaries
don't necessarily map-- sorry,
those integral point boundaries don't
necessarily map to pixel boundaries.
And therefore,
you get a little bit of anti-aliasing
on the edges of your image draw,
which cause these lines--
I don't know how visible it
is from the back of the room,
but there's a couple vertical lines that
cut down the screenshot here because
those images didn't quite line up right.
So the way you fix this is
actually kind of challenging.
I wanted to show this in the demo,
but it's so hard that we
couldn't show it in the demo.
The way you fix this is going to
be adopting some new APIs that we
put out after the leopard seed.
But essentially, conceptually,
what you do is when you're about
to draw these two images and
you want to draw them aligned,
you already have your
point-based rectangles that
you're using to draw them.
You need to convert those point-based
rectangles to pixel-based rectangles.
Round the coordinates appropriately so
they fall on integral pixel boundaries.
And then convert that rectangle back to
point space and draw into that rectangle.
And that's how you fix these cracks.
We've got a little bit of
sample code in the documentation
that works for trivial cases.
But as we found, it doesn't work for a
lot of the common cases,
so we'll get that revved when we can.
Apps that use OpenGL have a
unique problem to deal with.
OpenGL is one of those
API sets that really wants to
operate in terms of pixels.
That's its API contract.
So if you are taking your view,
and it's potentially an
OpenGL view subclass,
or maybe you're a CarbonGL client,
and you're taking your point
coordinates and saying,
OpenGL,
please make me a surface this big.
Well, if those point coordinates
map to more pixels,
OpenGL doesn't know that.
OpenGL just saw a request to
make a 100 by 100 rectangle.
So it's going to make a 100
pixel by 100 pixel rectangle,
which is going to look too small.
So generally what you need to do is,
again, take the size of your rectangle,
translate it from the point
space to the pixel space
before calling the OpenGL APIs.
And so this is a little bit of sample
code that would work in an NSOpenGL view
subclasses reshape method to do that.
In a few rare cases,
we've found that our bitmap art does not
look as good as we want it to when it's
displayed at any arbitrary scale factor.
So we're shipping bitmap art
in an application that's got
a 1x version and a 4x version.
When we're running at a
scale factor higher than 1.0,
we take that 4x version
and we scale it down.
So Core Graphics, of course,
does some interpolation on the image,
and occasionally you
get some jaggy effects.
To fix this, you need to switch on, well,
you can do two things.
The easy way is to switch on higher
quality interpolation with Quartz.
There's APIs from both the C-side
and the Objective C-side to do that.
But the thing you need to realize is
that there is a performance overhead.
Anytime Quartz does something
that's higher quality,
it's going to take more processing power.
So there's a little bit
of a tradeoff there.
You may find that if you're using this
art in a very performance sensitive area,
that you can't just ship a
1x version and a 4x version.
You may need to ship other smaller
versions that match the particular
scale factors you care about.
So you might want to ship a 1x, a 2x,
and a 4x, for example.
And that will allow you to make
pixel-perfect art for any scale factor.
applications that use off-screens.
Not a whole lot of them these days,
but a few do.
Often you'll see it for apps that
magnify other portions of other
applications or things of that nature.
Applications that use off-screens
need to realize that your generation
of an off-screen buffer doesn't
have any automatic framework
support for the scale factor in it.
It's your code.
You're saying,
give me a buffer that's exactly this
many pixels by this other pixel size.
So it's up to your application code to
make sure you increase the dimensions
you're requesting for your off-screen
buffer based on the scale factor.
So this is one of the other places
on the system where you need to think
in terms of pixels because that's
what the API contract already is.
We've also found a few applications
that draw directly to the screen
in various nefarious ways.
And we don't like it.
So stop doing it.
There are lots of different ways you can
achieve the same kinds of effects from
overlay windows and various other things.
The ramification of drawing to the
screen is that your application
will probably get thrown into
that small mode bucket by default.
So that's not where you want to be.
You really want to be scaled up like
everyone else because it looks good.
So please stop drawing directly
to the screen if you're doing it.
The classic example are applications
that do XORing as part of like
a window resize operation.
You know,
it may be an old Carbon application
that isn't using our
normal window resize code,
but they're still trying to
get the gray outline and it's
doing screen-based XORing.
You might find that when you're
running at a higher scale factor,
the XOR is generating a much
smaller rectangle than you'd expect
because that rectangle is being
actually interpreted in pixels,
not points.
Applications that support plugins
are a potential challenge.
I don't have any super
concrete advice here other than
offering a general approach.
If you have a plugin API that
supports any notion of coordinates,
you know, maybe it allows your plugin to
find out where the last mouse
click was or it tells the plugin
to draw on a given rectangle,
you need to define to your plugin
developers what coordinate space
those points and rectangles are in.
Are they in points or are they in pixels?
It doesn't matter to me,
it matters to your plugin developers,
so document that,
let them know so they can
do the right thing in the
resolution independence modes.
A harder case is plugin models
that support Quick Draw.
Quick Draw can't be
resolution independent,
so you need to rethink that plugin model.
Maybe this is a great opportunity to
come up with a new plugin model that's
more modern and you can get your plugin
developers migrated over to that path.
If you absolutely have to support
these Quick Draw based plugins,
that portion of your application
probably can't be resolution independent.
There may be a few other ways.
If you're really in this boat,
I'd love to hear from you if you can
come up afterwards and let me know who
you are and what your plugin API is.
I might have a few other ideas.
We do something kind of similar
to this in the menu manager.
We have some,
we support older menu definitions that
are entirely Quick Draw based and we
can allow them to render into an off
screen instead of actually rendering
to the window that's on screen.
And then we scale up that off screen
image when we blit it to the screen.
So this slows down menus.
It doesn't get particularly great looking
menus and it propagates an older API that
we'd love to get developers off of.
So you may find yourselves
in a similar boat.
It may just be time to come up with a new
plugin model for your plugin developers.
OK, so I want to do two quick demos
of how you can adopt resolution
independence in some apps.
So if we could switch
over to the demo machine,
that'd be great.
So I have a little application we've
been working on here called Airport.
Shows you the airport status for
a number of different airports.
And it is a Cocoa application,
and I'm running in 1.0 scale factor,
normal leopard, so it looks just fine.
This application has two things
to pay attention to real quickly.
It's got this custom view up at
the top that says airport status.
You know, you can think of that as the
application's logo or maybe my
company's logo or something like that.
And it has the list of airports.
That list of airports is supposed
to automatically size so that you
can see all the airports on launch.
So let me quit this app.
crank up the scale factor.
And rerun.
OK, so I can immediately see one problem.
The window is not sized properly.
The scroll bar is showing-- so I can
still get to the content of the airports,
but really I wanted that window to
show all the airports by default.
So this is a classic case
of a coordinate mismatch,
where my application is sizing
a window based on points,
but the window sizing API I'm
using actually wants to
operate in terms of pixels.
So let's fix that real quick.
Go into my Xcode project.
And OK,
so I've got a method here called set
ideal window frame where I calculate
the appropriate height for the list,
figure out a delta,
and then apply that delta
to the window frame size.
Ignore the commented out code for now.
That's the fix.
So what I was doing is I was
getting the window frame,
increasing the height of the
window frame by the delta
that the list needed to grow.
And then I set the Windows frame to that.
Well,
it just so happens that the set frame
API expects the size to be in pixels,
not in points,
whereas my list height delta
was actually in points.
So I can do a fairly simple
conversion to fix that.
The first thing I do after getting
the window frame from the window,
I convert that frame from window
coordinates to my views coordinates.
And then I apply the delta.
And then I convert back
to window coordinates,
which are pixels.
So if I run that now,
The list comes up sized properly.
So this is probably the most common
problem you'll see in your applications,
is your windows don't show
up the right size initially.
So those are usually really easy to fix.
Now one thing that's harder to see--
are some pixel cracks.
Well, let's do first things first.
So on Pixie,
I'm zoomed in on the artwork for
this image behind the airport status.
And I can see two problems.
One, I can see I have old artwork
that's being scaled up.
And so it's a little anti-aliased.
It's somewhat hard to tell from
both the screen up there in Pixie.
But as I stand here and
look at the monitor,
I can see it pretty clearly.
It's scaling up old art.
And I don't really want that.
I'd much rather have crisp art.
Now in Pixie,
one thing you can see is that there is
a vertical line cutting down just to
the right of the curve on the placard.
And that's a classic
example of a pixel crack.
It's also happening on the right
side of the widget as well.
So that's because I'm drawing this--
So, first things first.
Let's go ahead and fix the
art so we have high res art.
I'll crank the scale factor down real
quick so the other apps are usable.
So, I go through my applications bundle.
I find the art.
I either rev it myself
or I talk to an H.I.
design company or my own H.I.
designers and say, please give me higher
resolution versions of this art.
And let's see.
They give me back this.
They give me back a set
of six pieces of art with
One X version for a given piece
and the four X version for a
given piece for both the left,
the middle,
So, what I need to do is I need to
run UserBin TiffUtil on this
to take these multiple Tiffs
and merge them into -- sorry,
multiple Tiffs for just one piece.
So, I'm going to take the two left
pieces and merge them into a
single file using TiffUtil.
I'm going to do the same thing
for the middle and the right.
So, let me show you how that works.
Oh, you know what?
Let's relaunch terminal with a higher
scale factor so you can actually read it.
Is that readable?
OK.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, what am I doing wrong here?
Why is that not-- there we go.
Okay,
so I have these six different pieces.
What I'm going to do is I'm going to
merge the 1x version of the left slice
with the 4x version of the left slice.
So call tiffytil with cat high DPI check,
pass in the two pieces that
I want to merge together.
I just want it to be called slices
left TIFF because that's the name
of the file I already had in my
bundle and I just want to be able
to take this multi-ref TIFF file and
replace the old file in my bundle.
And so I run it and it tells me
two images were written to slices
left.TIFF and I'm glad it said that.
It didn't tell me any errors so I know
my HI designers did the artwork right.
And so I would do that
for the other two pieces,
but I'm going to save the typing because,
as you can see,
I'm not a great typist when I'm miked.
So I already pre-merged the multi-rep
TIFF files into single files.
I'm going to copy them into my
images that's part of the project.
Let me make sure I copied all three.
This has got-- oops.
And we get to use Finder in high res.
had problems not actually
replacing everything.
So let's replace them.
Go back into Xcode.
Clean out all the objects.
Rebuild.
And oh, you know what?
It did not replace it.
So I had my copy bug.
Well, let's ignore that bad looking art
on the right side of the status bar.
So I've clearly got higher
res art that I'm using now,
and that's fantastic.
Now, there were also those pixel
cracks that I showed you.
And like I said,
fixing some of these pixel
cracks are non-trivial.
So I'm just going to wait for
the new APIs that come out in a
later Leopard Seed to fix that.
So that's that app.
So it actually is pretty easy to
get most application content working
in resolution independence mode.
Let's look at another interesting case.
Close this.
There is a piece of existing Cocoa sample
code that can run a full screen--
OpenGL animation.
Let's run it at 1.0 so you
can see what it looks like.
So it's a spinning globe,
and you can change the light source
and move the globe around a little bit.
And it's just showing off some
various OpenGL functionality
and full screen mode.
We're not concerned about
the full screen mode.
I just want to show you what happens when
you run this at a higher scale factor.
So we'll quit it,
set the scale factor to 2, and run.
And you get that.
Your animation did not
actually increase in size,
and it's in the wrong
place in your window.
This is the classic OpenGL problem.
This tells me I need to
change the coordinates I'm
passing to the OpenGL APIs.
And as it turns out,
that's actually really simple.
Let's go to... Okay,
so that's not the one I want.
I have my OpenGL subclass.
I have a reshape method that
currently calls setViewportRect,
which is a method on another class
that I've got that wraps OpenGL.
with-- sorry,
let's look at this a little bit closely.
I get the views bounds,
and I pass that directly
to setViewportRect.
takes that rectangle and calls
GL viewport with that rectangle.
Just so happens that GL viewport is one
of the OpenGL APIs that expects pixel
coordinates for the height and width.
So I need to fix that in my call site.
So what I'm going to do
is I'm going to fetch--
GUY FALLEN:
So I'm going to set my view's bounds.
And then I'm going to convert
those bounds from my own view's
coordinate system to the nil view,
or to the Windows coordinate system.
And the Windows coordinate
system is inherently pixels.
Sorry, and I'm actually just
converting the size.
And then I'm going to pass that
converted rectangle to set viewport rect.
[Transcript missing]
So this is pretty straightforward stuff.
I mean, yes, it is some effort,
but it's going to have some big payoff.
Like we said, in the State of the Union,
we want your apps to be
resolution independent by 2008.
So start working on it now.
When you're revving your artwork,
stick to the vector formats when you can.
If you have to use bitmaps,
make sure you've got multiple
resolutions of those bitmaps.
For Carbon developers,
we have the requirement that
you get off of Quick Draw,
get on to compositing mode,
and we also have a few other
Carbon sessions dealing with
some of those subjects in detail.
I don't list them all here.
Well, let's just start from the top.
We've got an awesome document that talks
in more detail about how your application
can adopt resolution independence.
It's on the attendee website.
It goes into more detail on a lot
of the subjects I only glossed over.
The Cocoa Session 106 talks about more
high DPI adoption stuff for Cocoa apps.
The session immediately following this
in this room is a Carbon session on,
among other things,
how to take advantage of resolution
independence in a Carbon app.
And for Java, there's another session
on performance tuning,
your Java application,
where they talk about
resolution independence.
We also have some carbon-based
sessions for integrating with Cocoa,
and particularly NS Cursor and NS Image.
And those will be useful for
Carbon apps that want to become
resolution independent and take
advantage of NS Image and NS Cursor.
So make sure you check those out as
well if you're a Carbon developer.